Brain State Dynamics in Ketamine-Induced Dissociation Resemble Those in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder

Authors: N. Goldway, Taly Markovits, Naomi B. Fine, Tom Fruchtman-Steinbok, G. Gurevitch, G. Deco, Haggai Sharon, T. Hendler
Journal: Biological Psychiatry Global Open Science
Date: 2025
DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsgos.2025.100655
Citations: 0
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ae7f0d6d632f3a02f5028d66f9c58a5765d0107

ABSTRACT: Background Dissociation, an altered state of consciousness in which individuals feel detached from their body, environment, and sense of self, is a common feature of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Despite its significance, the neurocognitive processes underlying dissociation remain poorly understood, potentially limiting diagnostic precision and treatment efficacy in PTSD. Methods To address this gap, we applied network control theory to resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine neural dynamics during dissociative states in 2 contexts: healthy volunteers (n = 30) undergoing intravenous administration of ketamine, an anesthetic known to induce dissociative states, and patients with PTSD receiving an intervention aimed at alleviating dissociative symptoms (a secondary analysis of data from 78 patients who participated in previously conducted clinical trials). Results Ketamine administration led to resting-state brain dynamics resembling those observed in patients with PTSD before treatment, characterized by an increased dominance of a default mode network (DMN) meta-state and a decreased dominance of a somatomotor network (SOM) meta-state. Posttreatment reduction in the dominance of the DMN meta-state correlated with a decrease in dissociative symptoms in patients with PTSD. Computational modeling analysis revealed that after treatment, patients with PTSD exhibited a more organized and less entropic brain state. However, contrary to our hypothesis, ketamine administration did not lead to significant changes in these entropy-related indices. Conclusions Dissociative states, whether induced by pharmacological manipulation or clinical condition, are accompanied by increased dominance of the DMN meta-state and reduced dominance of the SOM meta-state.

FULL TEXT:
Dissociation, a mental state characterized by perceptions of disconnection from one’s body, environment, and sense of self (1), can significantly contribute to the manifestation of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (2). Patients with dissociation demonstrate more severe symptoms (3), elevated rates of suicidal ideation and self-harm (4), memory deficits (5,6), and difficulties in social cognition (7, 8, 9). The contribution of dissociative symptoms may be so significant that some researchers have proposed distinguishing dissociative and nondissociative subtypes of PTSD (10). However, a mechanistic understanding of the neurocognitive processes underlying dissociation remains limited.

To study dissociation in the laboratory, ketamine, an NMDA receptor antagonist originally developed as an emergency anesthetic, has proven useful (11). Ketamine produces dissociative symptoms such as derealization (i.e., feeling detached from surroundings); depersonalization (i.e., feeling detached from self); and altered perception of the body, environment, and time (12). The phenomenological resemblance between trauma-induced dissociation and ketamine’s subjective effects is highlighted by the fact that the Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), the gold standard for measuring ketamine’s dissociative effects, was originally developed to assess these symptoms in individuals with PTSD (13). Notably, despite this overlap, PTSD-related and ketamine-induced dissociation differ in etiology: PTSD reflects chronic, trauma-related adaptations, whereas ketamine induces a brief, pharmacologically driven dissociative state.

A useful framework for conceptualizing brain mechanisms of dissociation argues that cognitive states can be organized along a spectrum ranging from order (low entropy) to disorder (high entropy). Normal waking consciousness is considered to be a state of relatively high order, while altered states of consciousness, such as delirium, psychosis, dissociation, and psychedelic states, are considered states of relative disorder (14,15).

Recent methodological advancements inspired by network control theory, which examines how the structure of connections within a network influences the flow of activity (16), now enable researchers to test these predictions empirically. Through network control theory, researchers can characterize the brain’s energetic landscape by quantifying the energy required for transitions between recurrent brain states. This transition energy reflects how easily the brain can shift from one state to another.

An example of the implementation of network control theory to study abnormal states of consciousness was recently introduced by Singleton et al. (17). This study demonstrated that classic psychedelics, such as psilocybin and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), alter brain functional organization by reducing the overall energy needed for state transitions. This reduction flattens the energetic landscape, promoting a less organized, more entropic pattern of brain dynamics. This is consistent with previous theoretical suggestions that similar changes in brain dynamics may also occur in other altered states of consciousness, such as dissociation (14,15,18).

To test this prediction, in the current study, we examined system-level brain dynamics underlying dissociative states using network control theory. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data were collected in 2 contexts: a pharmacological model, in which dissociation was induced by ketamine infusion in healthy individuals, and a clinical model, in which patients with PTSD were scanned before and after a therapeutic intervention that improved their symptoms.

For the pharmacological model, 30 healthy volunteers participated in a within-subjects, single-blind, fixed-order trial design where they received either an intravenous placebo (saline) or racemic ketamine (initial bolus of 0.4 mg/kg followed by a continuous drip of 0.4 mg/kg/hour during the MRI scan) (Figure 1A, top panel). For the clinical model, we conducted a secondary analysis on data collected from 78 patients with PTSD who participated in 3 clinical studies (19,20). These patients received therapeutic intervention aimed at improving their PTSD pathology, including dissociative symptoms. Interventions included psychotherapy, neurofeedback, or a combination of both. Resting-state fMRI and clinical data were collected before and after the intervention [for more details, see (19,20)] (Figure 1A, bottom panel).

(A) Experimental design. We used 2 experimental models to characterize resting-state dynamics corresponding to dissociative states. In the pharmacological model, participants came to the laboratory twice and were scanned following either placebo or ketamine administration. In the clinical model, patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) were scanned and clinically evaluated both before and after therapeutic intervention. (B) Analytic procedure. All functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time-series data across participants and conditions were concatenated, and k-means clustering was applied to identify recurring patterns of brain activity that we refer to as states. (C) We used a network control theory framework to assess the minimal control energy required for state transitions between ketamine and placebo, as well as between pre- and posttherapeutic interventions for PTSD. BOLD, blood oxygen level–dependent; iv, intravenous.

We hypothesized that changes in brain dynamics would be similar when comparing the effects of ketamine versus placebo and when assessing these dynamics before and after therapeutic interventions in patients with PTSD. Furthermore, we expected that changes in dissociation would correspond to changes observed in resting-state dynamics. Additionally, we anticipated that dissociative states would be accompanied by lower energy required for state transition, reflecting a flattening of the energetic landscape previously observed under other mind-altering drugs (17) corresponding to a more entropic brain state (14,18). We predicted lower transition energy under ketamine compared with placebo, as well as lower transition energy pre- versus posttherapeutic intervention in patients with PTSD. These predictions rest on the working assumption that phenomenological overlap between ketamine- and trauma-related dissociation can manifest as partially similar brain dynamics, despite differences in etiology and timescale.

We implemented an analytical framework inspired by network control theory to test these hypotheses. Following previous examples (17,21), we first used unsupervised clustering to detect coactivation patterns or brain states (Figure 1B). Next, we characterized changes in the dynamics of these states following ketamine relative to placebo and pre- versus posttherapeutic intervention in patients with PTSD. Then, we calculated the energy required to transition from state to state based on the structural connectivity underlying the coactivation patterns characterizing each brain state (Figure 1C). Finally, we tested whether ketamine infusion or changes in PTSD symptom severity following treatment were associated with alterations in the brain’s energetic landscape.

All studies were conducted at the Sagol Brain Institute, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. Participants provided written informed consent and were given an overview of the protocol. Studies were approved by the Medical Center Ethics Committee (Approval Nos. 0270-13, 0215-15, 0696-14, and 0616-17).

The pharmacological study was a single-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subjects experiment, with each session taking place on a separate day, 1 to 2 weeks apart. Upon arriving at the laboratory, participants first completed a battery of self-report questionnaires and behavioral tasks including the CADSS (13). Participants then received infusions of either a placebo or ketamine in 2 stages: an initial bolus loading dose (0.4 mg/kg) followed by a continuous steady drip (0.4 mg/kg/hour). The placebo session was always administered first, with participants unaware of the sequence. Approximately 10 minutes after the initial bolus infusion, participants responded to a verbally administered CADSS, facilitated by the researcher. Participants then underwent an MRI scan, including an anatomical and a resting-state fMRI scan.

In the first clinical trial, participants were randomized in a blinded manner to receive either trauma-focused intensive therapy (TFIT) or TFIT plus 10 sessions of amygdala-related neurofeedback training, starting twice weekly for 2 weeks and then once weekly (20). In the second clinical trial, patients were randomly assigned to 1 of 3 groups: treatment as usual, amygdala-related neurofeedback in a neutral context, or amygdala-related neurofeedback in the context of being exposed to their traumatic narratives (19). The neurofeedback intervention included 15 sessions, also starting twice weekly for 2 weeks and then once weekly. In the third clinical trial, patients were randomly assigned to either amygdala-related neurofeedback training or alpha/theta neurofeedback training. The intervention phase included 6 neurofeedback sessions over 4 weeks, beginning with twice-weekly sessions for 2 weeks and followed by once-weekly sessions (TF-S, Ph.D. and TH, M.D., PhD, unpublished data, April 2016–June 2019). In all studies, the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS-5), conducted by clinicians before and immediately after the treatment course, was used to evaluate PTSD diagnosis and symptom severity. Participants also underwent resting-state fMRI and other fMRI tasks pre- and posttreatment.

Data for the pharmacological model were derived from 30 participants (mean ± SD = 30.4 ± 3 years, 16 female) with no reported psychiatric or neurological disorders. Data for the clinical model were derived from 78 participants (mean ± SD = 36.4 ± 10.2 years, 50 female). The clinical model included 3 groups. The first group consisted of 27 women treated in specialized outpatient clinics for survivors of childhood sexual abuse, all of whom still met PTSD criteria after a year of intensive trauma-focused psychotherapy. The second group included 29 adults (mean ± SD = 38.2 ± 9.6 years, 19 female) whose primary traumatic event occurred more than 14 months before recruitment. The third group consisted of 22 adults (mean ± SD = 34.7 ± 10.4 years, 14 female) primarily recruited from emergency rooms and trauma clinics. Recruitment procedures, exclusion criteria, and additional participant characteristics are provided in the Supplement.

Each session included 8-minute eyes-open resting-state scans for the pharmacological model and 6-minute eyes-open resting-state scans for the clinical model. Blood oxygen level–dependent fMRI was acquired using a 3T Siemens Prisma scanner with a 20-channel head coil with TR/TE = 2500/30 ms, FOV = 220 mm, 96 × 96 acquisition matrix, parallel acceleration factor = 2, 82 flip angle. Forty-two oblique axial slices were acquired in an interleaved fashion, each 3 mm thick with 0 slice gap.

All resting-state data were preprocessed with fMRIPrep (22); details of motion censoring, spatial smoothing, filtering, and atlas assignments are provided in the Supplement.

Following previously published procedures (17,21), all participants’ fMRI time series (78 patients with PTSD before and after treatment and 30 healthy participants with placebo and ketamine) were concatenated. K-means clustering was applied to identify clusters of brain activation patterns (states) (see Figure 1B for illustration). We selected k = 6, as it met the accepted threshold (17,21) and allowed the identification of 3 interpretable meta-states defined by their cosine similarity to predefined resting-state networks (Supplement).

Cluster centroids were defined by their cosine similarity to binary representations of 7 predefined resting-state networks (17,21,22), as illustrated in the radial plots of Figure 2. Because the regional time series for each scan was standardized (z scored), positive centroid values indicate activity above the mean (higher amplitude), while negative values indicate activity below the mean (lower amplitude). To assess the hierarchical structure of centroids shown in the radial plots, Pearson correlation coefficients were computed between all centroids (Figure S5). Then, we grouped the anticorrelated pairs and identified each centroid as a distinct substate, referring to the paired centroids collectively as a meta-state (17,21).

Data-driven clustering of brain activity patterns. Group-level recurrent brain states are represented by the average activation patterns across all participants and conditions for each of the 6 clusters (shown at the bottom of the figure). For each state, cosine similarity between high-amplitude (above-average) and low-amplitude (below-average) activity and predefined resting-state networks was measured and visualized using radial plots (top of the figure). The visual network (VIS) meta-state includes 2 substates, VIS+ and VIS−, which show contrasting patterns between the VIS and ventral attention network (VAT)/dorsal attention network (DAT). The default mode network (DMN) meta-state consists of DMN+ and DMN− substates, characterized by an opposition between the DMN and somatomotor network (SOM)/attention network. The SOM meta-state comprises SOM+ and SOM− substates, marked by contrasting patterns between the SOM and frontoparietal network (FPN). These contrasts between states are clearly shown in both the radial plots and brain volume renderings and are statistically supported by a significant negative Pearson correlation. Brain states were extracted from all participants (N = 107) at both time points, resulting in a total of 214 scans. LIM, limbic network.

To characterize changes in the temporal dynamics of brain states, we used a well-established measure called fractional occupancy (FO). FO is determined by the proportion of TRs (time points) assigned to each cluster in the analyzed scan relative to the total number of TRs in the scan (17,21). Specifically, k-means clustering produces an assignment of each fMRI volume (time point) to a cluster. To calculate the FO for a given brain state in a scan, the number of fMRI volumes assigned to that state is divided by the total number of fMRI volumes in the scan.

A representative structural connectome was generated from Human Connectome Project diffusion data (n = 32) using standard tractography in DSI Studio and Lead-DBS (23, 24, 25); full pipeline details are in the Supplement.

Network control theory provides a framework for characterizing the computational processes that underlie brain network dynamics. We followed previous examples (16,17,21) that used this framework to assess levels of stability, or entropy, that characterize the brain during rest. In this context, entropy can be operationalized by evaluating how much control energy is required for the brain to transition between states. Energy refers to a theoretical, mathematical construct derived from changes in brain activation patterns, based on the brain’s structural connectivity. The amount of energy required to transition between states can be interpreted as an index of stability; the more energy needed to shift between states, the more stable and less entropic the brain state is.

We calculated the energy required for state transitions based on a linear time-invariant model that describes the dynamics of the network (the brain).

Here, x represents a vector of length N that encapsulates the regional activity at time t. The matrix B is an N × N matrix that specifies the weights for control inputs. B is the identity matrix, as our input is uniform. To determine the minimum control energy needed to transition the system from an initial activity state (x0) to a final state (xf) within a specified time (t), we calculated an invertible controllability Gramian (W) for managing the network A.

Analyses were run in R (version 4.1.1) and MATLAB (version R2021a; The MathWorks, Inc.) using mixed-effects models (afex, emmeans) with maximal random structure; see the Supplement for full specification.

Ketamine produced a stronger feeling of dissociation relative to placebo as indicated by a higher CADSS (13) total score (F1,131.48 = 74.9, p < .001). Comparing each time point in the placebo and ketamine session indicated that session effect was not evident before drug administration (t130 = −1.3, p = .197), was robust at the end of the initial bolus (t129 = 11.76, p < .001), and was still evident 40 minutes after the infusion was stopped (t131 = 4.75, p < .001) (Figure 3A).

Behavioral readouts. (A) Dissociation was greater in the ketamine condition compared with the placebo condition, particularly at the postbolus time point. (B) The overall severity of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms, as well as dissociative symptoms, decreased following therapeutic intervention. Points represent individual scores on the behavioral/clinical assessments. Bar heights represent the mean scores for the group at each time point. ∗p < .05, ∗∗∗p < .001. CADSS, Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale; CAPS-5, Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale.

The clinical status of patients with PTSD improved overall following treatment, as indicated by lower total CAPS-5 (26) scores after the intervention (F1,70.25 = 54.75, p < .001). Dissociation in patients was assessed by summing the severity scores from the 2 designated items in the CAPS-5 (items 3/B3 and 8/D1). A subset of the patients with PTSD (37 of 78) exhibited dissociative symptoms, that is, they had a pretreatment score >0 on at least one of these items. As scores ranged from 0 to 8 on a discrete scale, we tested clinical improvement in dissociative symptoms for this subgroup of patients following treatment using a nonparametric Wilcoxon test, which indicated statistically significant improvement posttreatment (V = 381.5, p = .026) (Figure 3B). For all subsequent analyses, we included all patients with PTSD in our sample unless stated otherwise.

To identify recurring brain activity states, we implemented the k-means clustering algorithm, which groups brain activation patterns into a predetermined number of clusters, k. Following previously described procedures (17,21,27), we concluded that k = 6 stable clusters provided a suitable solution for segmenting the data. These 6 clusters could be categorized into 3 meta-states, each consisting of 2 substates that display contrasting activation patterns: meta-state 1 (default mode network [DMN]/ventral attention network [VAT]–dorsal attention network [DAT]), meta-state 2 (somatomotor network [SOM]/frontoparietal network [FPN]), and meta-state 3 (visual network [VIS]/VAT-DAT) (Figure 2).

To identify brain state dynamics corresponding to dissociative states, we labeled each participant’s fMRI time-series data based on the 6 identified brain states (see Figure 1B for illustration). This allowed us to extract the FOs, i.e., the probability of occurrence of each brain state, for each participant in each session.

Both ketamine and therapeutic intervention for PTSD modified the brain’s state dynamics as assessed by meta-state FOs (session × meta-state interaction; ketamine: F2,174 = 6.88, p = .001; PTSD: F2,462 = 6.92, p = .001). Notably, these dynamics changed in a similar fashion. FOs of the DMN meta-state were marginally higher in the ketamine session compared with placebo (t145 = 1.75, p = .08, familywise error rate [FWER]–corrected p = .16) and significantly higher at the pretreatment relative to the posttreatment time point in the clinical model (t385 = 2.76, p = .006, FWER-corrected p = .018). In addition, FOs of the SOM meta-state were lower under ketamine (t145 = −3, p = .003, FWER-corrected p = .009) and before the therapeutic intervention (t385 = −2.48, p = .014, FWER-corrected p = .027). Finally, neither the ketamine intervention nor therapeutic intervention affected the FOs of the VIS meta-state (ps > .21) (Figure 4A, B). When we examined both conditions in the same model (ketamine and pretreatment PTSD defined as session 1 and placebo and posttreatment PTSD as session 2), a similar but more robust pattern of results emerged. A significant session × meta-state interaction was observed (F2,636 = 12.85, p < .001). Post hoc analyses revealed significant effects for the DMN (t530 = 3.0, p = .003, FWER-corrected p = .006) and SOM (t530 = −3.976, p < .001, FWER-corrected p < .001) but not for the VIS meta-state (t530 = 0.99, p = .33). All interactions involving the type of experimental model (pharmacological vs. clinical) were nonsignificant (ps > .14). Additional matrices of temporal dynamics provided further support for this pattern (Figure S8).

(A, B) Changes in meta-state fractional occupancies (FOs) following ketamine intervention (n = 30) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) therapeutic intervention (n = 78). Changes in brain dynamics between ketamine and placebo were similar to those observed when comparing pre- and postintervention in patients with PTSD. In the ketamine condition and before the clinical intervention for PTSD, the default mode network (DMN) meta-state FO was higher and the somatomotor network (SOM) meta-state occupancy was lower compared with the placebo or postintervention time point. Points represent individual FO scores for each meta-state and session. Bar heights represent the mean scores for the group at each meta-state and time point. (C) For a subset of participants (n = 37) who demonstrated dissociative symptoms at the preintervention time point, the reduction in DMN meta-state FO was correlated with reduced dissociative symptoms. ∗p < .05, ∗∗p < .01, uncorrected. CAPS-5, Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale; VIS, visual network.

To follow up on this result, we examined whether individual differences in changes in state dynamics correspond to improvements in dissociative symptoms in PTSD. To this end, we selected the subset of our sample that demonstrated dissociative symptoms before the clinical intervention (n = 37). Then, we calculated the delta in DMN and SOM meta-state FOs for each participant and computed the Spearman correlation between this index and the reduction in dissociative symptoms. Results indicated that reduced DMN meta-state FO was correlated with dissociative symptom improvement (ρ = 0.39, p = .018) (Figure 4C) but not with increased SOM meta-state FO (ρ = 0.037, p = .83).

To characterize the mechanisms underlying changes in the brain’s state dynamics, we utilized a computational modeling approach inspired by network control theory, a branch of traditional control theory in engineering that has been implemented in neuroscience to examine how different brain regions interact based on their structural connections (17,21,28). This framework allows calculation of the control energy—the amount of input required for the brain to transition from one state to another. Here, we specifically tested whether the normalized minimum control energy, defined as the group-level z-scored values obtained by mean-centering and scaling all transition energy values, required to exit each meta-state was affected by ketamine infusion in healthy individuals or by a clinical intervention in patients with PTSD.

We found that ketamine infusion did not affect the transition energy required to exit any meta-state (F1,145 = 0.84, p = .36). However, improvement in PTSD severity was associated with an increase in the minimal energy required for state transitions (F1,385 = 6.58, p = .01), primarily driven by the higher control energy needed to exit the SOM meta-state (t385 = −2.64, p = .009, FWER-corrected p = .026) (Figure 5).

Changes in transition energy per meta-state following ketamine infusion and therapeutic intervention for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The ketamine infusion did not affect the minimal energy required to exit one meta-state and transition to another. However, the minimal control energy required to exit a meta-state in the PTSD group was higher after treatment, indicating a more stable energetic landscape. Bar heights represent the mean difference in normalized energy values required to exit the meta-state for each meta-state. Error bars depict SEM. DMN, default mode network; SOM, somatomotor network; VIS, visual network.

In this study, we applied theory-informed, state-of-the-art analytical methods for fMRI resting-state analysis to investigate brain dynamics related to dissociation in 2 contexts: intravenous ketamine administration in healthy individuals and therapeutic interventions in patients with PTSD. We found that the brain dynamics induced by ketamine mirrored those observed in patients with PTSD before treatment (i.e., when exhibiting more dissociative symptoms). This pattern was characterized by a greater dominance of a meta-state linked to the DMN and attention networks (the DMN meta-state), along with a lower occupancy of a meta-state associated with the FPN and SOM (the SOM meta-state). Despite these similarities, our computational modeling results diverged from predictions. While we expected both dissociation-related states (ketamine and pretreatment PTSD) to exhibit lower state transition energies, indicative of a flattened energetic landscape, ketamine administration did not significantly alter the brain’s energetic landscape. In contrast, PTSD treatment resulted in more energy required to exit meta-states, potentially reflecting greater stability and reduced entropy in system-level brain dynamics.

Studies linking resting-state functional connectivity to PTSD and dissociative symptoms have typically focused on seed brain regions, often chosen based on reverse inference. For example, if amygdala activity during threat learning is deemed important for PTSD (29), this brain region might be used as a seed in resting-state studies (30, 31, 32), even though the relationship between amygdala resting-state connectivity and abnormal threat learning requires further investigation [but see (33, 34, 35)]. This approach has been used to explore connectivity patterns of subcortical areas involved in arousal and related to threat detection and defense behaviors (30, 31, 32,36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41) and in cortical areas associated with mental simulation and repetitive negative thinking (42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47).

Other studies have adopted a data-driven approach, observing changes in connectivity in the central executive network, DMN, and salience network (48, 49, 50). This exploratory approach may be useful for generating hypotheses and may have practical utility but does not directly provide mechanistic insight. Here, we clustered brain coactivation patterns into distinct, stable meta-states, capturing brain dynamics in a low-dimensional space that reflects whole-brain activation. This method combines the strengths of data-driven and hypothesis-driven approaches, avoiding assumptions about specific brain regions or networks to analyze.

Across datasets, increased occupancy of DMN meta-states was observed together with higher levels of dissociation, while the occupancy of SOM-related meta-states was relatively low. The finding that greater DMN meta-state occupancy was linked to increased dissociation can be interpreted with respect to 2 central tenets of dissociation, derealization and amnesia. Derealization involves a disconnection from one’s surroundings, while amnesia involves disruptions in the continuous sense of reality over time (5). Activity in DMN regions supports internally focused processes, such as imagery and mental time travel (51), disengaged from processing current sensory information. Thus, an increased tendency to occupy DMN-related meta-states may reflect a propensity to detach from the immediate sensory reality. This may manifest in everyday experiences, such as losing track of external events or struggling to recall recent actions. In extreme cases, this disconnection can lead to dissociative experiences. Notably, the subjective content of dissociation is likely to differ substantially between healthy participants receiving ketamine and patients with PTSD. Therefore, the feelings and mental imagery associated with these states may be remarkably distinct. However, this remains untested, as subjective experience was not assessed.

Reduced occupancy of SOM-related meta-states may suggest that bodily representations are less accessible during dissociation. This is consistent with observations that individuals with dissociative symptoms often feel disconnected from their bodies, experiencing numbness or diminished bodily awareness, with less vivid representations than in normal consciousness (52).

The balance between the DMN and SOM meta-states could potentially serve as a target for future interventions. Studies may utilize neurofeedback (53) to help individuals with dissociation spend less time in DMN-related meta-states and more time in SOM-related meta-states. One potential avenue could be covert neurofeedback, where participants receive real-time feedback about their brain activity without explicit awareness of the targeted state. This manipulation can change brain network dynamics and related behavior (54,55).

Previous studies examining brain state dynamics under LSD and psilocybin (17) have reported findings consistent with ours. The altered mental states, whether dissociative or psychedelic, were accompanied by an increased dominance of a DMN-related meta-state and a reduced dominance of the SOM-related meta-state. Additionally, a flatter energetic landscape, indicative of a more entropic brain state, was observed when comparing LSD and psilocybin with placebo, and a conceptually similar but weaker effect emerged when comparing pre- with posttreatment PTSD. Although dissociative and psychedelic states differ in several ways, they also share similarities (56). For example, the dissociative ketamine has been shown to produce feelings of ego dissolution and increased connectedness—effects commonly observed with classic psychedelics (15,57). At the same time, classic psychedelics can induce alterations in bodily perception (58) and reality monitoring (59), which are core features of dissociation.

Contrary to our expectations, ketamine did not affect the energy required to transition between meta-states. It may be that the intervention was not strong enough, as the dose we used (0.4 mg/kg) is lower than the typical clinical dose for depression (0.5 mg/kg) (60) and much lower than what is usually required to induce pronounced (psychedelic) effects using ketamine (61).

At first glance, the finding that ketamine, currently being investigated as a treatment for PTSD (62, 63, 64), shifts brain dynamics toward those observed in more severe PTSD may appear paradoxical: How can a therapeutic agent induce a state resembling the disorder that it treats? The key distinction lies in timescale and context. The ketamine-induced state is acute and transient, whereas PTSD reflects a breakdown in adaptive stress regulation; what begins as a protective response gradually becomes rigid and maladaptive. Research with both humans and rodents has demonstrated that acute stress responses engage plasticity mechanisms that act as a teaching signal, indicating that existing predictions about the environment are no longer adequate. Transient surges in noradrenaline, dopamine, and glucocorticoids temporarily enhance neural gain and synaptic plasticity (65,66). However, when the stress response becomes chronically activated, these same mechanisms lose their adaptive function, leading to desensitization, rigidity, and impaired regulation (67, 68, 69). Much like acute stress, ketamine transiently boosts neuroplasticity (70, 71, 72) and may help resensitize a system, restoring it to a more flexible and adaptive range. This transient plasticity window could be harnessed in psychotherapy, facilitating the learning of new regulation strategies and adaptive behaviors (73,74).

Our findings indicate that dissociation, whether pharmacologically induced or associated with severe clinical status, is characterized by increased occupancy of DMN-related meta-states and reduced occupancy of SOM-related meta-states. This pattern is consistent with a shift toward internally oriented/self-referential processing and away from somatic representation.

This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (Grant No. 945539 [Human Brain Project SGA3]), the Israel Science Foundation (Grant No. 2923/20) within the Israel Precision Medicine Partnership, the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (Grant No. 602186), the Israel Ministry of Commerce Innovation Authority’s Kamin Program (Grant No. 67951), and JOY Ventures.

NG, NF, and TH contributed to conceptualization. NG, NF, and TF-S contributed to data collection. NG, TM, GG, GD, and TH contributed to formal analysis. NG, TM, GD, HS, and TH contributed to investigation. NG, TM, GG, GD, HS, and TH contributed to methodology. NG, TM, and GD contributed to visualization. NG contributed to writing the original draft of the article. NG, TM, NF, TF-S, GD, HS, and TH contributed to reviewing and editing the article. NG and TH contributed to project administration. TM, GG, and HS contributed to data curation. HS and TH contributed to funding acquisition. TH contributed to supervision. All authors gave final approval for publication and agreed to be held accountable for the work performed therein.

We also thank the Sagol Family Fund for their support. We thank the clinicians and researchers who contributed to patient recruitment for the studies included in this project: Dr. Yotam Pasternak, Dr. Roy Sar-El, Dr. Dan Mirelman, Noam Sarna, Nili Green, Gali Bar, Dana Kinori, Maya Weinstein, Dana Natan, Dana Kariti, Professor Michael Krasnoshtein, Dr. Dalia Brandes, Dr. Oren Tene, Efrat Routledge, Marina Gordon, Dr. Miki Bloch, Zivya Seligman, Daphna Armon, and Dr. Liat.

A previous version of this article was published as a preprint on PsyArXiv: https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/v52qb_v1.

The analysis code and data supporting the findings of this study are available on the Open Science Framework at https://osf.io/46zfm/.

TH is the Chief Medical Scientist and Chair of the advisory board at GrayMatters Health Co., Haifa, Israel, and has stock options. This company sells the platform of Prism for PTSD, neurofeedback driven by an amygdala-related biomarker, which is also used as the neurofeedback probe in this study. All other authors report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.

Supplementary material cited in this article is available online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpsgos.2025.100655.