What is needed for the roll-out of psychedelic treatments?

Authors: Stephen N Xenakis, Scott M. Shannon
Journal: Current Opinion in Psychiatry
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.1097/YCO.0000000000000946
Citations: 4
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4bfcced066b5649be1b652beac3556a920ac1757

ABSTRACT: Purpose of review The pace of psychedelic treatments continues to increase. Regulation and coherent clinical guidance have not been established. A philosophical divide limits effective resolution of a practice delivery quandary: is this primarily a pharmacological or psychotherapeutic intervention? Recent findings Lykos (formerly MAPS) has submitted its new drug application (NDA) request to the FDA for 3-4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD and is expecting a response by the summer of 2024. Australia endorsed psilocybin and MDMA for regulated use in 2023. Multiple phase II and III clinical trials are also being conducted in the United States and Europe to study the use of psilocybin. Currently, Colorado and Oregon have legalized psilocybin in different manners. In Colorado, plants containing psilocybin, ibogaine, dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and mescaline (other than peyote) are now legal to possess, share and cultivate. Guidelines for regulated treatment with psilocybin containing mushrooms are in process with service delivery to begin early in 2025. In Oregon, clients must complete a preparation session with a licensed facilitator before consuming psilocybin products at a licensed service center. A prescription is not required. It is expected that other states will follow suit with a ballot measure likely in Massachusetts this year. Additionally, in the United States, the DEA, state boards, pharmaceutical distributors, and professional liability carriers all share mounting concerns about the in-home use of compounded ketamine used as a psychedelic therapeutic via remote prescribing. Summary Psychedelic treatments are rapidly entering the mainstream of medical care delivery in the United States. Clinical guidelines are urgently needed to ensure well tolerated practice and coherent regulation. The delivery of this guidance is limited by a core philosophical disagreement. Resolution of this conflict will be needed to deliver coherent clinical guidelines. Current research and clinical experience provide a solid foundation for practical clinical guidance and the introduction of psychedelics into healthcare.