The influence of pretreatment respiratory sinus arrhythmia dimensions on trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy outcomes: Findings from a randomized controlled feasibility trial

Authors: Michelle P. Brown, Chad E. Shenk, Brian Allen, Emily D Dunning, M. A. Lombera, Ashley M Bucher, N. Dreschel
Journal: Journal of Traumatic Stress
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.1002/jts.23053
Citations: 1
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/jts.23053

ABSTRACT: Abstract Child maltreatment is associated with respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) dysregulation, a physiological indicator of emotion regulation that predicts elevated posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms and may be a mechanism of action for exposure‐based therapies, such as trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF‐CBT). Animal‐assisted therapy (AAT) has been proposed as an adjunct to TF‐CBT for improving emotion regulation following maltreatment. The current study reports findings from a randomized controlled feasibility trial (N = 33; M age = 11.79 years, SD = 3.08; 63.6% White; 66.7% female) that measured youths’ resting RSA, RSA reactivity, and RSA recovery in response to a pretreatment laboratory challenge. We tested whether (a) lower pretreatment resting RSA was associated with blunted RSA during the challenge; (b) either of the pretreatment RSA dimensions predicted more severe pretreatment PTSD symptoms; and (c) either of the pretreatment RSA dimensions predicted less severe posttreatment PTSD symptoms and, as an exploratory aim, whether this was moderated by treatment group (i.e., TF‐CBT vs. TF‐CBT + AAT). Results from multiple linear regression indicated that, after controlling for pretreatment symptom severity, there was a large effect size for higher resting RSA predicting less severe caregiver‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms, β = −.52, p = .058, and higher RSA during recovery predicting less severe child‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms, β = −.70, p = .056, although these findings were not significant. These preliminary results offer important insights for future studies to investigate how the ability to regulate RSA informs which children need additional support to benefit from psychotherapeutic treatment.

FULL TEXT:
Child maltreatment has a far‐reaching impact on multiple domains of child development (Cicchetti, 2013). Aside from maltreated children exhibiting higher levels of psychopathology, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), there is abundant evidence that maltreatment results in the dysregulation of stress response systems, and the influence of child maltreatment on the respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) is increasingly being studied (Holochwost et al., 2021). RSA is measured by assessing the beat‐to‐beat variability in heart rate associated with respiration and indexes the level of parasympathetic control over cardiac activity that is responsible for regulating sympathetic activity during and after environmental challenges (Porges, 2003). Generally, higher levels of RSA when at rest and moderate withdrawal of RSA when faced with a challenge or stress are indicative of normative functioning in regulating emotions and stress (Beauchaine et al., 2019). In contrast, low RSA and blunted or excessive withdrawal of RSA in times of stress have been associated with PTSD (Beauchaine et al., 2019; Campbell et al., 2019; Campbell & Wisco, 2021).

Baseline levels of RSA and RSA reactivity may provide additional information regarding traumatized individuals’ risk for adverse outcomes. Indeed, in a study of youth at increased risk for adversity exposure, RSA reactivity during a stressful parent–youth discussion was negatively associated with posttraumatic stress symptoms (PTSS), indicating that greater withdrawal of RSA was linked with higher symptom levels (J. R. Cohen et al., 2020). Similarly, 8–18‐year‐old trauma‐exposed youth with full or partial PTSD demonstrated a decrease in RSA when presented with trauma imagery relative to neutral imagery; this contrasted with a reverse pattern of RSA reactivity for trauma‐exposed controls without PTSD (Zantvoord et al., 2024). Other studies have further explored how RSA patterns during rest, reactivity, and recovery may impact the risk for unfavorable outcomes. For example, in one study of 31 adults with PTSD, researchers exposed participants to a script, which contained information they provided about their traumatic experiences (Sack et al., 2004). Participants exhibited lowered RSA when presented with a trauma script compared to a prior neutral script, which is indicative of RSA withdrawal. Interestingly, investigators divided participants into two groups based on their resting RSA and found that participants with high RSA reached their peak heart rate earlier during a presentation of the script and decelerated to their baseline heart rate faster during the recovery period. In contrast, the low RSA group demonstrated higher peak heart rates, delayed deceleration to baseline, and significantly longer recovery times.

These abnormal patterns in resting RSA and RSA reactivity have implications for the development of psychopathological symptoms in individuals who have experienced trauma or adversity. In one study, resting RSA and RSA reactivity were found to interact with childhood adversity in predicting internalizing problems (McLaughlin et al., 2014). Specifically, childhood adversity only predicted internalizing symptoms in adolescents with low resting RSA and RSA reactivity when they were exposed to a social stressor. Additionally, Goulter and colleagues (2021) found that family adversity and resting RSA both significantly predicted co‐occurring internalizing and externalizing problems. Jenness et al. (2019) found that RSA interacted with child abuse to predict PTSD symptoms such that the association between abuse and PTSD symptoms was only present for youth with average‐to‐low RSA levels.

In addition to influencing physiological and psychological symptoms, maltreated children's baseline RSA and reactivity levels may aid in predicting their response to treatment. One study examined whether pretreatment RSA predicted differential symptom change in a sample of 48 children aged 7–13 years (Lipschutz et al., 2017). Participants had experienced at least one potentially traumatic event and presented with several PTSD symptoms at baseline before engaging in a 12‐week trauma‐informed cognitive behavioral treatment that included exposure (i.e., narrative and in vivo) related to their traumatic experiences. Investigators found that although RSA seemed to normalize to moderate levels over the course of treatment, pretreatment resting RSA was not associated with PTSD symptom reduction. Additional research with trauma‐exposed children is needed to determine which aspects of RSA have implications for treatment outcomes.

It is also important to understand an individual's ability to recover after exposure to a stressor. In one study conducted with adolescents exposed to a social stressor, investigators found that withdrawn RSA rebounded quicker following the stressor for participants with high resting RSA (McLaughlin et al., 2014). Other studies have found an inability for reduced RSA to restore itself to baseline levels in participants with a PTSD diagnosis following exposure to a trauma‐related stressor (Sack et al., 2004) and participants with a history of abuse—but no PTSD diagnosis—following a non–trauma‐related stressor (Dale et al., 2009). Given these findings, it would be helpful to investigate whether traumatized children's RSA during recovery predicts treatment response.

Considering that traumatized individuals’ ability to regulate their psychophysiological stress response influences psychopathology and could impact treatment response, it is important to examine what may help to facilitate better RSA regulation. Incorporating animal‐assisted therapy (AAT) into exposure‐based treatments is one possibility. AAT is when an animal is included in the delivery of a treatment to enhance treatment effects or participation (Chandler, 2005). There is some limited evidence that the presence of animals can help trauma‐exposed children and combat veterans regulate emotions, reduce PTSD symptoms, and decrease physiological stress symptoms (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure) during exposure‐based exercises and psychotherapy (Tedeschi et al., 2015). In a study of forensic interviews of children participating in group therapy for sexual abuse, there were significant differences in heart rate, depending on sexual assault type, for control group participants; conversely, there were no significant heart rate differences for participants in a group with dogs presents (Krause‐Parello & Gulick, 2015). In a systematic review of animal‐assisted interventions (AAIs) for trauma, O'Haire and colleagues (2015) found that six of 10 studies reported decreased depression and four of 10 studies reported decreased anxiety in trauma‐exposed participants.

Beetz (2017) provides an overview of theories and possible mechanisms for the positive effects of AAI. Activation of the oxytocin system has been widely proposed as a possible psychophysiological mechanism to influence these effects along with heart rate and other cardiovascular changes (Beetz, 2017; Tedeschi et al., 2015). Indeed, if AAT has an anxiolytic effect, incorporating AAT into trauma‐focused psychotherapy may help children who have been maltreated further regulate RSA withdrawal during gradual or imaginal exposure exercises, which could have implications for psychopathology symptom reduction. Pretreatment RSA measures may provide insight into which children may benefit most.

The current study reports findings from a randomized controlled feasibility trial that evaluated the preliminary effectiveness of AAT as an adjunct to standard TF‐CBT in the treatment of maltreated youth with PTSD (Allen et al., 2021). TF‐CBT (J. A. Cohen et al., 2017) is an evidence‐based psychotherapeutic treatment developed to reduce PTSS in youth aged 3–17 years. This intervention (i.e., TF‐CBT), which has been examined in randomized clinical trials (RCTs), follows a structured, components‐based, 12‐session protocol that is broken into three different treatment phases of equal length and delivered in 90‐min sessions.

Before starting treatment, participants completed a baseline assessment during which they were exposed to a laboratory stressor, the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST; Kirschbaum et al., 1993), which includes a resting phase, an exposure phase, and a recovery phase. Participants’ RSA was measured throughout this assessment. We investigated whether pretreatment RSA dimensions (i.e., resting RSA, RSA reactivity, and RSA recovery) predicted less severe PTSD symptom scores at posttreatment. Additionally, as an exploratory aim, we examined whether associations between pretreatment RSA dimensions and treatment response are moderated by treatment group (i.e., standard TF‐CBT vs. TF‐CBT + AAT). We examined our predictions using both caregiver‐ and child‐reported PTSD symptoms given differences in findings based on reporter in prior research from the same trial (Allen et al., 2021). We made three hypotheses. First, we predicted that lower resting RSA at pretreatment would be associated with blunted (i.e., lower) levels of RSA withdrawal during the stressor. Second, we expected that lower resting RSA, blunted RSA withdrawal during stress, and lower RSA during recovery at pretreatment would be associated with higher levels of pretreatment PTSD symptoms. Finally, we hypothesized that pretreatment RSA dimensions (i.e., resting RSA, RSA reactivity, and RSA recovery) would predict treatment response as measured by less severe PTSD symptoms at posttreatment; as an exploratory aim, we also examined whether this association was moderated by treatment group.

A total of 33 children and adolescents (66.7% female) between 6 and 17 years of age (M = 11.79 years, SD = 3.08) participated in this study. Participants presented to an outpatient treatment clinic affiliated with an academic medical center that specializes in the treatment of maltreated youth who present with psychiatric disorders and their families. The sample was diverse in race (63.6% White, 21.2% African American, 15.2% multiracial) and ethnicity (21.2% Hispanic/Latino). See Allen et al. (2021) for a complete description of demographic information for children and caregivers.

Inclusion criteria for the study were: (a) a child between 6–17 years old exposed to at least one instance of physical abuse, sexual abuse, and/or interpartner violence per primary caregiver report; (b) the participation of nonoffending primary caregiver in treatment; and (c) a caregiver‐reported score of 32 or higher on the UCLA PTSD‐RI Reaction Index for DSM‐5 (UCLA PTSD‐RI; Pynoos & Steinberg, 2013). Children were excluded from participation if (a) their estimated IQ was below 80 per the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004); (b) they had been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder or other developmental delay; (c) they exhibited a current safety concern warranting a higher level of psychiatric care (e.g., active suicidal ideation); (d) their caregiver had psychiatric or cognitive limitations that prevented active participation; or (e) they had an uncontrolled allergy to dogs, a fear or dislike of dogs, or a history of aggression toward animals.

Of the 33 eligible families, 22 provided reliable electrocardiogram (ECG) data that was needed to generate RSA estimates; see Figure 1 for reasons ECG data were not obtained from other participants. Participants who did not provide ECG data did not differ from participants with ECG data on age, sex, treatment group, or pretreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI score. We examined child sex and age as potential control variables. Both were unrelated to either of the outcome variables and, thus, were not included in the analyses. Descriptive statistics for study variables, by treatment group status, are displayed in Table 1. We did not find group‐level differences for most variables. However, caregivers of children assigned to the TF‐CBT+AAT condition reported higher posttreatment PTSD scores than those assigned to standard TF‐CBT, p = .053.

Note: TFT‐CBT = trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy; AAT = animal‐assisted therapy; ECG = electrocardiogram; TSST = Trier Social Stress Test.

Descriptive statistics for variables, by treatment group status

Note: RSA = respiratory sinus arrhythmia; CG = caregiver; PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; CI = confidence interval.

aAssessed using the UCLA PTSD‐RI Reaction Index.

This study followed a randomized controlled feasibility trial design and conformed to CONSORT guidelines on the reporting of clinical trials (Schulz et al., 2010). The study was pre‐registered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03135119). All study procedures were approved by the Penn State College of Medicine Institutional Review Board and the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Standards for the ethical treatment of human and animal participants were followed. For all participants, parents or guardians provided informed consent, and youth provided assent. Participants were recruited through either (a) the identification of potentially eligible participants via the consecutive screening for all families that presented to the outpatient treatment clinic to request services using the standard intake procedures or (b) direct contact with research staff by interested caregivers after learning of the study through various public dissemination recruitment efforts. As displayed in the CONSORT diagram (Figure 1), 54 of the 75 referred participants were deemed eligible for inclusion, and 33 families enrolled in the study, which constituted the intent‐to‐treat (ITT) sample used for subsequent analysis.

Once participants and their caregivers had consented, they proceeded with the pretreatment assessment. First, participants completed the TSST while their RSA was measured using an ECG. The TSST is a widely used stress paradigm in which participants deliver a speech to two “judges” and complete an arithmetic task. The full paradigm includes a rest, stress exposure, and recovery phase and has been shown to reliably elicit a psychophysiological stress response (Kirschbaum et al., 1993; Stroud et al., 2009). For this portion of the pretreatment assessment, a research assistant (RA) first explained to the youth and caregiver how to affix the ECG electrodes and allowed them to do this themselves in private. The RA then connected the ECG to the electrodes and led the child to an interview room where they were told that they would have five minutes to think about how they were going to introduce themselves to two judges. The RA informed them that they could use this time to prepare for the speech if they wanted and that they were allowed to take notes but could not use notes during the speech. This period was denoted as the resting phase. Following this 5‐min period, the RA let the child know their time was up and led them to another room to stand in front of the two judges to deliver their speech for 5 min. If the child ended the speech before the 5 min was up, one of the judges reminded the youth that there was time remaining. If the child stopped again or was silent for 15 s, the judges asked the child a series of prescribed open‐ended questions until the full time had elapsed. Following the speech, the youth completed a 5‐min serial subtraction task in which they were asked to count backward or subtract from a set number, with the difficulty of the task dependent upon the child's age. If the youth made a mistake, the judge asked them to start over. Judges maintained neutral facial expressions throughout the paradigm. Both the speech and the serial subtraction task comprised the reactivity phase. At the end of this task, the RA reentered the room, led the youth back to the interview room, and asked the youth to sit quietly for 5 min; this constituted the recovery phase. After the TSST was complete, the child was able to remove all electrodes, and the RA collected the ECG. The child and caregiver then completed all remaining study measures to verify eligibility and assess PTSS.

Randomization. Once the pretreatment assessment was complete and eligibility was verified, participants were enrolled in the study and randomly assigned to receive either standard TF‐CBT or TF‐CBT+AAT. The trial utilized a blocked randomization design in which participants were stratified by both sex (male, female) and age (6–11 years or 12–17 years). The study statistician generated the randomization sequence before the start of the trial. The statistician, research coordinator, and RAs responsible for collecting assessment data were blinded to treatment condition.

TF‐CBT. Two master's‐level clinical social workers who previously completed independent training and certification for TF‐CBT and who had 3–5 years of experience in the treatment of abused youth administered both intervention conditions. Clinicians were randomly assigned to eligible trial participants. Both conditions followed the standard TF‐CBT protocol, which encompassed 12 weekly 90‐min sessions split equally between the child and the primary caregiver. TF‐CBT is broken up into three treatment phases of equal length. The first phase focuses on skill development, which includes psychoeducation about trauma; instruction in parenting skills; and training in relaxation techniques, emotion regulation, and cognitive coping. The second phase includes trauma narration and processing during which the child develops a factual account of their traumatic experiences and restructures trauma‐related maladaptive thoughts. The final phase of treatment involves real‐world mastery over prior trauma through the child sharing the completed narrative with a supportive caregiver, confronting feared stimuli associated with the trauma, and developing a plan for future safety. Of note, gradual exposure occurs throughout all phases of treatment via therapeutic discussions about the index traumatic event and application of skills to regulate PTSS that occur when the patient is reminded of the trauma, as well as through the creation and sharing of the trauma narrative with a caregiver and future safety planning.

TF‐CBT+AAT. The TF‐CBT+AAT condition involved contracting with a local organization that provided trained service dogs. Before the trial was initiated, clinicians met with the specific service dogs that would be involved in the trial. Clinicians were trained by dog handlers to identify canine body language, recognize signs of comfort or distress, and learn how to provide cues (e.g., prompting the dog to sit or move away). The clinicians then rehearsed how to integrate dogs into the delivery of TF‐CBT during a series of mock pilot sessions with volunteer youth in the study age range while receiving feedback from dog handlers. Once the trial commenced, dogs participating in the trial in the TF‐CBT+AAT condition were required to be in the room for all treatment sessions when youths were engaged in a portion of the treatment. However, the youths’ level of engagement with the dogs was not dictated and was determined by the child's personal preference and comfort. If the child appeared distressed, clinicians would offer interaction with the dog as an available coping skill alongside other previously taught skills but otherwise did not deliberately introduce the dog into the session activities. Trained dog handlers visually observed all treatment sessions without audio from behind a one‐way mirror to ensure animal safety. Participants were informed that they were present to observe the dogs but could not hear the session contents.

For the pretreatment assessment during the TSST, participants were connected to an ambulatory, three‐lead ECG using the Biolog 3991x/4‐GPP system (UFI, Inc., Morro Bay, CA, United States). Prior to each treatment session, participants completed a 10‐min “warm up” to habituate to the equipment. Disposable Ag/AgCl electrodes were placed on the participant's chest to acquire an ECG signal and detect interbeat intervals (IBIs), the time measured, in milliseconds, between heart contractions. Data from IBIs were transferred, inspected, and edited for artifacts using CardioEdit software (Brain‐Body Center, 2007). Once edited, we used CardioBatch software (Brain‐Body Center, 2016) to quantify RSA amplitude in 30‐s epochs (Porges, 1985; Porges & Bohrer, 1990). For more detailed information about the RSA data collection, editing, and quantification procedure, see Shenk et al. (2022).

The 27‐item child and adolescent self‐report version of the UCLA PTSD‐RI‐5 (Pynoos & Steinberg, 2013) was administered to assess the frequency of PTSD symptoms the youth had experienced in the past month. Caregivers completed a parallel parent‐report version of this measure relative to their child's symptoms. The measure's items correspond with PTSD criteria outlined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.; DSM‐5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Youths were asked to rate items on a 5‐point Likert scale ranging from 0 (none of the time) to 4 (most of the time), with item scores summed to create a total PTSD symptom severity score. This measure's strong psychometric properties are well‐documented (Kaplow et al., 2020; Steinberg et al., 2013). We included caregiver‐ and child‐reported PTSD symptom scores at pretreatment and posttreatment to assess whether pretreatment RSA predicted treatment response based on posttreatment PTSD symptoms, controlling for pretreatment symptoms. Cronbach's alpha values for the UCLA PTSD‐RI‐5 total PTSD score were .89 at pretreatment and .94 at posttreatment for child‐reported symptoms; alpha values for caregiver report were .87 at pretreatment and .94 at posttreatment.

Data were checked for missing values, frequencies, minima, and maxima, and continuous data were checked for skewness and kurtosis. We ran Pearson correlation analyses to determine associations between variables. For our first hypothesis (i.e., lower resting RSA at pretreatment would be associated with blunted levels of RSA withdrawal during the stressor task), we first calculated the average RSA across 30‐s epochs within each part of the stressor task—the resting phase, reactivity phase (i.e., during the TSST speech and serial subtraction tasks), and the recovery phase. To measure participants’ level of RSA withdrawal (i.e., reactivity), we subtracted the average resting RSA from the average RSA during the TSST, with higher values indicative of blunted withdrawal. Resting RSA and RSA during recovery are reported as the average value across the 30‐s epochs within each period, in line with prior literature (Dale et al., 2009; McLaughlin et al., 2014). To examine whether resting RSA was associated with blunted withdrawal, we examined their intercorrelation and ran a regression analysis with resting RSA as the predictor and withdrawal as the outcome. For our second prediction (i.e., lower resting RSA, blunted RSA withdrawal during stress, and lower RSA during recovery at pretreatment would be associated with higher pretreatment PTSD symptom levels), we ran separate regression analyses with each of the RSA pretreatment values (resting, withdrawal/reactivity, and recovery) entered as predictor variables and pretreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI score as the outcome variable. For our third prediction (i.e., pretreatment RSA dimensions would predict treatment response as measured by less severe posttreatment PTSS), we conducted separate linear regressions with posttreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI score as the outcome variable and each of the three pretreatment RSA variables as predictors, controlling for pretreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI score. We also ran separate regressions for caregiver‐ and child‐reported UCLA PTSD‐RI scores. For our exploratory aim, we entered interaction variables to determine whether associations between RSA pretreatment variables and posttreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI score were moderated by treatment group.

Effect sizes for our analyses are presented using J. E. Cohen's (1988) guidelines of f 2 values of 0.02, 0.15, and 0.35 representing small, medium, and large effect sizes, respectively. Results were considered significant at a level of p < .05. We conducted all analyses in R (Version 4.1.2; R Core Team, 2022), and regression analyses were conducted using the lavaan package (Rosseel, 2012). All predictor variables were centered prior to analyses, and we addressed missing data using full information maximum likelihood as a basis for parameter estimation (Arbuckle, 1996). Of the 22 children who provided pretreatment RSA data, the percentage of variable‐level missing data was 0.0% for child‐ and caregiver‐reported pretreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI scores and 22.7% (n = 5) for child‐ and caregiver‐reported posttreatment UCLA PTSD‐RI scores. Using G*Power (Kang, 2021) to conduct post hoc sensitivity analyses, we determined that with 80% power, we could only detect a very large overall effect size (i.e., f 2 = 0.71) or lower in the case of fewer predictors for analyses including these 22 participants.

Intercorrelations among study variables for the overall sample are displayed in Table 2. To examine potential correlations between pretreatment RSA dimensions and PTSD symptoms more deeply, we included correlations with specific DSM‐5 PTSD symptom clusters (i.e., intrusions, avoidance, negative alterations in cognitions and mood, and alterations in arousal and reactivity). Pretreatment resting RSA was significantly and negatively correlated with caregiver report of children's pretreatment avoidance symptoms. As shown, pretreatment resting RSA was significantly and positively correlated with pretreatment RSA during recovery, which likely reflects repeated measurement. Most PTSD scores and symptom clusters were significantly and positively correlated with each other within reporter (i.e., caregiver vs. child) and across assessment time (i.e., pretreatment vs. posttreatment). However, significant positive associations in PTSD symptoms between caregiver and child were inconsistent.

Note: RSA = respiratory sinus arrhythmia; CG = caregiver; Cog = cognitions; PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder.

Assessed using the UCLA PTSD‐RI Reaction Index.

The findings did not support our prediction that lower pretreatment resting RSA would be associated with blunted levels of RSA reactivity/withdrawal during the TSST. There was a medium, nonsignificant effect for lower resting RSA predicting RSA withdrawal during the TSST, β = −.18, p = .395.

The findings did not support our hypothesis that lower resting RSA, blunted RSA withdrawal, and lower RSA recovery at baseline would be associated with higher pretreatment PTSS. The analyses revealed small‐to‐medium effect sizes that were not significant. Specifically, pretreatment resting RSA, β = −.07, p = .750; RSA withdrawal during the TSST, β = −.02, p = .929; and RSA during recovery following the TSST, β = −.19, p = .354, did not predict higher levels of caregiver‐reported PTSD symptoms at pretreatment. Pretreatment resting RSA, β = −.06, p = .774; RSA withdrawal, β = −.05, p = .820; and RSA during recovery, β = −.07, p = .738, also did not predict child‐reported pretreatment PTSD symptoms.

Analyses examining the influence of pretreatment resting RSA and its interaction with treatment group on caregiver‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms are presented in Table 3. There was a large effect size for a negative association between pretreatment resting RSA and caregiver‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms, β = −.52, such that participants with lower pretreatment resting RSA reported higher levels of posttreatment PTSD symptoms; however, this association was not significant, p = .058. There was a medium main effect of treatment group, β = .29, p = .020, with participants in the TF‐CBT+AAT condition reporting significantly higher posttreatment PTSD symptoms than those in the TF‐CBT group. When exploring the interaction between treatment group and resting RSA, there was a large, nonsignificant effect, β = 0.43, p = .052, for higher levels of pretreatment resting RSA predicting less severe PTSD symptoms at posttreatment for the TF‐CBT group but more severe PTSD symptoms for the TF‐CBT+AAT group (see Figure 2). A similar finding occurred with pretreatment recovery RSA and its effect on child‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms. The full results of this regression are presented in Table 4. Specifically, there was a large effect size for higher pretreatment RSA during the recovery period predicting less severe PTSD symptoms, although this finding was not significant, β = −.70, p = .056. However, a large, nonsignificant interaction effect between RSA during recovery and treatment group, β = .58; p = .117, appears to influence this finding (see Figure 3). Specifically, higher RSA during recovery predicted less severe child‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms for the TF‐CBT group but more severe posttreatment symptoms for the TF‐CBT+AAT group. RSA withdrawal did not predict caregiver‐reported, β = .07, p = .788, or child‐reported, β = .24, p = .528, posttreatment PTSD symptoms, and treatment group did not moderate the effect of RSA withdrawal on caregiver, β = .‐1, p = .975, or child‐reported symptoms, β = −.23, p = .471.

Results of regression examining the effect of pretreatment resting respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and its interaction with treatment group on caregiver‐reported posttreatment posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms

Note: n = 22. Treatment group was coded as 0 for trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF‐CBT) and 1 for TF‐CBT + animal‐assisted therapy. CI = confidence interval.

Assessed using the UCLA PTSD‐RI Reaction Index.

Plot of the interaction effect between pretreatment respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) recovery and treatment group in predicting child‐reported posttreatment posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms.

Note: TF‐CBT = trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy; AAT = animal‐assisted therapy.

Results of regression examining the effect of pretreatment respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) during recovery and its interaction with treatment group on child report of posttreatment posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms

Note. n = 22. Treatment group was coded as 0 for trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF‐CBT) and 1 for TF‐CBT + animal‐assisted therapy. CI = confidence interval.

Assessed using the UCLA PTSD‐RI Reaction Index.

Plot of the interaction effect between pretreatment respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) recovery and treatment group in predicting child‐reported posttreatment posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms. Note:

TFT‐CBT = trauma‐focused cognitive behavioral therapy; AAT = animal‐assisted therapy.

The current feasibility study used an RCT design to examine the influence of pretreatment RSA, a physiological indicator of emotion regulation, on TF‐CBT treatment outcomes of maltreated children. Considering that maltreated children may have less optimal RSA regulation patterns, our study contributes to the literature on the effectiveness of TF‐CBT by considering how RSA predicts response to evidence‐based treatments in this population. Further, given increased interest in determining whether AAT enhances treatment effects for individuals who have experienced trauma, we included an exploratory aim of investigating whether treatment group (i.e., children receiving TF‐CBT+AAT vs. standard TF‐CBT) interacted with pretreatment RSA dimensions in influencing symptom reduction.

The most notable findings come from our examination of our prediction regarding the association between pretreatment RSA and posttreatment PTSD symptoms. These findings, when interpreted in the context of the present study's feasibility design and small sample size, offer important insight. Specifically, although the finding did not reach significance, there was a large effect size for a negative association between pretreatment resting RSA and caregiver‐reported PTSD symptoms posttreatment such that participants with lower resting RSA at pretreatment had more severe PTSD symptoms at posttreatment. Similarly, there was a large effect size that did not reach significance for a negative association between pretreatment RSA during TSST recovery and child‐reported posttreatment PTSD symptoms such that higher pretreatment recovery RSA predicted less severe posttreatment PTSD symptoms. These preliminary findings extend findings from this same trial that found that more RSA regulation, defined as less variability in within‐session RSA change during treatment, was significantly related to less severe PTSD symptoms posttreatment (Shenk et al., 2022). Further, these preliminary findings suggest that children with higher RSA during rest and recovery may be more sensitive to positive treatment effects than their peers with lower RSA.

Our exploratory examination of whether pretreatment RSA dimensions interacted with treatment group to predict posttreatment PTSD symptom severity provides additional insight into our findings. For caregiver‐reported PTSD symptoms, pretreatment RSA had a large but nonsignificant interaction effect with treatment group. Specifically, when plotting this interaction, higher levels of pretreatment resting RSA appear to predict less severe caregiver‐reported PTSD symptoms posttreatment for the TF‐CBT group but more severe symptoms for the TF‐CBT+AAT group. This pattern of findings was similar for pretreatment recovery RSA and child‐reported symptoms. Closer examination of these interactions (Figures 2 and 3) and the full results of both regression analyses appear to indicate that child‐ and caregiver‐reported higher symptom levels among participants in the TF‐CBT+AAT group is the primary reason the main effect of pretreatment resting and recovery RSA did not reach significance in predicting less severe symptoms. These results are in line with prior research from this trial that also failed to find greater treatment effects for TF‐CBT+AAT versus TF‐CBT alone, both in terms of change in RSA regulation (Shenk et al., 2022) and change in PTSD symptom severity (Allen et al., 2021). Thus, it is possible that the lower levels of reported PTSD symptom improvement among participants in the TF‐CBT+AAT group counteracted a potentially significant main effect of pretreatment RSA during rest and recovery on posttreatment PTSD symptoms. Our preliminary findings provide further evidence that the addition of unstructured AAT to TF‐CBT is presently unsupported for maltreated children and may, in fact, reverse the positive effects of TF‐CBT for children with higher pretreatment RSA.

We also examined whether lower resting RSA predicted RSA in response to a stressful task but did not find support for this prediction. This is contrary to other studies that have found associations between lower resting RSA and various measures indicative of dysregulated RSA patterns in response to stress (Sack et al., 2004). One possible explanation for this lack of concordance may be methodological differences in the studies’ stress‐eliciting task. Sack and colleagues (2004) used a trauma‐related stimulus specific to participants’ traumatic experiences and required a rating of at least a 7 on a 10‐point Likert scale of distress related to the reminder. In contrast, we used the TSST, a robustly used, but unspecific, stress paradigm (Kirschbaum et al., 1993; Stroud et al., 2009). The act of recalling specific qualities of participants’ own traumatic experiences may relate more strongly to specific patterns of physiological stress response, such as RSA withdrawal, than general stressors. Future research investigating this further may provide better clarification. Alternatively, the lack of agreement between previous findings and our null finding may be due to our small sample size. Additionally, the TSST typically has a designated rest period that is separate from the speech preparation period. In our study, participants were told about the speech while the ECG was connected, and they were given the option to prepare for the speech at that time. Though this was designated as a rest period, this may have elicited anxiety in anticipation of the speech. Given the small sample size in this feasibility trial, we were not sufficiently powered to investigate further. Additionally, the focus of the present study centered on individual responses to treatment as opposed to whether the TSST successfully elicited a physiological stress response. Future studies with larger samples that include a separate resting and preparation period may provide further insight.

Next, and contrary to previous findings, we found that none of the pretreatment RSA dimensions (i.e., resting, withdrawal, or recovery) predicted higher self‐reported pretreatment PTSD symptoms. Previous researchers have found that low RSA and blunted or excessive RSA withdrawal in times of stress are associated with PTSD (Beauchaine et al., 2019; Campbell et al., 2019; Campbell & Wisco, 2021). As Campbell and Wisco (2021) point out in their study linking RSA patterns (i.e., higher RSA withdrawal) to PTSD symptoms, these associations are more consistent when study participants have concurrent PTSD and depression. It is possible that PTSD alone has a less robust association with RSA patterns than comorbid PTSD and depression. Beyond our primary predictions, higher resting RSA was associated with lower levels of pretreatment avoidance symptoms per caregiver report in our sample. Future studies could further investigate the relation of RSA to PTSD symptom categories.

Our findings provide valuable insight into the potential role of RSA in youths’ treatment response. Specifically, our findings preliminarily suggest that maltreated youth with higher pretreatment resting and recovery RSA may respond particularly well to TF‐CBT compared to those with lower RSA. If this is the case, TF‐CBT could be tailored to better alleviate PTSD symptoms for youth with lower RSA during rest and recovery. For example, youth with lower RSA who display more maladaptive patterns of emotion regulation may benefit from additional time spent learning relaxation skills and identifying and regulating emotional states in the TF‐CBT phase devoted to these skills. Further research is needed to both replicate our findings and determine which aspects of TF‐CBT may benefit youth with higher versus lower RSA to optimize improvement in PTSD symptoms posttreatment.

Our study had several strengths. First, we conducted an RCT to examine TF‐CBT adapted to incorporate therapeutic animals among a sample of children and adolescents who had been exposed to childhood maltreatment and/or interpartner violence. Additionally, we examined dimensions of RSA, including the resting, reactivity, and recovery phases, for youth exposed to a laboratory stressor, and, thus, we were able to broaden our research questions regarding how varying RSA patterns may predict treatment outcomes. We were limited by our sample size, which was impacted by issues in ECG data acquisition and did not give us adequate power to detect more realistic small or medium effects. Future, larger studies could alleviate these barriers. There also are no normed RSA cutoffs to compare “high” versus “low” responses. Future studies should continue to examine RSA differences in youth exposed to maltreatment and ways in which this may impact treatment response. Finally, to further gain insight as to how treatment differentially impacts youths’ RSA levels, future studies could examine within‐session average changes across the three different stages (i.e., stabilization, narration, safety planning) of TF‐CBT as a means of understanding how RSA patterns fluctuate across treatment focus.

Taken together with other published research from this feasibility trial, our preliminary findings suggest that patterns of RSA regulation at rest and during recovery in response to stress may both predict treatment outcomes and be influenced by treatment (Shenk et al., 2022), suggesting the possibility of regulation‐enhancing treatment foci. Such findings, if replicated in larger studies, may provide new avenues to explore in relation to treatment attrition, community‐based implementation, and case conceptualization.

The study was preregistered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03135119). Materials and analysis code for this study are not made publicly available due to ethical reasons (e.g., child welfare involved sample).

Michelle P. Brown is now at the Department of Psychology, University of South Carolina (Columbia, South Carolina, United States).

This research was supported by grants received from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD; R21HD091887, T32 HD101390). The preparation of this manuscript was supported by a career development award (K99/R00 HD103958) and a Loan Repayment Program Award (L40 HD103019) to Michelle P. Brown from the NICHD.

We would like to thank the trial's clinicians, Amy Slenker and Ryan Hagarman, as well as the youth and families who participated in this trial.