Therapeutics Uses of Psychedelics in patients with psychiatric disorders A Systematic Review

Authors: Sarosh Nawaz, A. Althwanay, Esraa M. AlEdani, M. Ch, Harleen Kaur, Malik Kasapoglu, Rajesh Yadavalli, Ann Kashmer, Abdulaziz Mohammed, Althwanay, M. Esraa, MB AlEdani, Ch, Mbbs, A. K. Yu
Journal: Journal For International Medical Graduates
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.56570/jimgs.v1i1.155
Citations: 0
URL: https://www.jimgs.com/ojs/index.php/journal/article/download/155/109

ABSTRACT: The impact of psychedelic treatment on patients suffering from psychiatric diseases like depression, anxiety, post-traumatic psychiatric disorder (PTSD), and existential distress related to cancer has become very intriguing to psychiatrists in the modern era. Serotonergic psychedelics include Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), psilocybin, mescaline, ayahuasca, and methylene-deoxy methamphetamine (MDMA) which act agonistically on 5-hydroxytryptamine type 2-A (5-HT2A) receptors. Psychedelics produce a wide range of effects, based on varying sites of 5-HT2a receptors, including changes in consciousness, perception, mood, and behaviour. Psychedelics can lead to both good and bad trips depending on the dose and environment in which it is taken. We used systematic approach by strictly following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines. Data is extracted from pub med using mesh strategy, and from google scholar and science direct by using keywords. 10 review articles are selected by using quality appraisal tools. The purpose of this paper is to highlight the mechanism of action and role of psychedelics in patients with mental health disorders. In this review, we discussed the effective models of neurodynamical changes produced by psychedelics, and we also show that these substances can be used as a potential treatment option for psychiatric patients. Psychedelics have shown effective improvement in psychiatric diseases in many pilot studies and randomized controlled trials. There is still a debate going on about which models best suggest their role in the field of psychiatry.