Brief Commentary: Marijuana Use During Gestation and LactationHarmful Until Proved Safe

Authors: E. Adashi
Journal: Annals of Internal Medicine
Date: 2019
DOI: 10.7326/M18-3175
Citations: 1
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/70dc2229335ad1ed6607f7b73d278438897bf6e2

ABSTRACT: Editors' Note: This commentary was selected for publication from among 100 submitted manuscripts in response to a call for readers' perspectives on prescribing or recommending marijuana. Marijuana, the most commonly used illicit substance during pregnancy, has gone mainstream (1, 2). Use of medical marijuana, now legal in 34 states and the District of Columbia, is experiencing a growth spurt (2). The same holds true for recreational use, with state-level legalization proceeding apace (2). A major upsurge in marijuana use during gestation and lactation may not be far behind (1, 2). Results from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health soon affirmed these projections (3). The prevalence of past-month marijuana use among pregnant women increased from 2.85% to 4.98% between 2002 and 2016 (3). Prevalence rates were as high as 8.5% in pregnant women aged 18 to 25 years (3). Fanned by social media and cannabis dispensaries, these growth trajectories are unlikely to decelerate anytime soon. Using marijuana to counter nausea during the first trimester of pregnancy, a practice many deem safe, is currently a common pattern of consumption (1). Use is also common in persons with anxiety and chronic pain (1). Faced with these realities, careful assessment of the safety of marijuana use during gestation and lactation is paramount. No clinical trials of marijuana or its components have been conducted during gestation or lactation (2). Therefore, none of these substances is presently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use during pregnancy or breastfeeding (2). Moreover, marijuana-based orexigenic drugs approved by the FDA (such as Marinol [AbbVie]) specify, use of cannabis during pregnancy should be avoided. The reason for this abundance of caution is marijuana's ability to readily cross the placental and bloodbrain barriers, where it probably interacts with the fetal and neonatal endocannabinoid system (1, 2). As such, it may interfere with implantation and placentation as well as fetal and postnatal neurodevelopment (2). Recent systematic reviews and longitudinal cohort studies suggest that use of marijuana during gestation may be associated with adverse perinatal outcomes, including stillbirth, fetal growth restriction, and preterm birth (2). Marijuana also may compromise long-term neurobehavioral development (2). Further research is needed if evidence-based guidelines for providers and patients are to be developed. Such studies should rely on a prospective design; independently ascertain exposure; and adjust for confounders, such as polysubstance use. Another reason that no marijuana-based drug is presently approved by the FDA during gestation and lactation is that existing data are insufficient to assess the efficacy and safety of marijuana in these settings (2, 4, 5). Absent the requisite data and an attendant FDA sanction, marijuana use in pregnant and lactating women should be discouraged (2, 4, 5). Several professional associations, erring on the side of caution, strongly discourage perinatal marijuana use (4, 5). Ongoing use that is deemed therapeutic should be replaced with a drug that has a pregnancy-specific safety record (2, 4, 5). Doing no harm requires that uncompromising vigilance not be allowed to lapse. Doing anything less is to ignore the well-being of would-be progeny.