Rapid and Prolonged Antidepressant and Antianxiety Effects of Psychedelics and 3,4-Methylenedioxy-methamphetamine—A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Authors: Dimy Fluyau, V. Kailasam, Neelambika Revadigar
Journal: Psychoactives
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.3390/psychoactives3040029
Citations: 2
URL: https://doi.org/10.3390/psychoactives3040029

ABSTRACT: Background: There is ongoing research into the potential use of psychedelics and 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA) as alternatives to commonly used medications for treating major depressive and anxiety disorders. Aims: We aimed to assess the efficacy of psychedelics and MDMA in managing depressive and anxiety symptoms and evaluate their safety profiles. Methods: We searched five databases for randomized controlled trials of psychedelics and MDMA targeting depressive and anxiety symptoms and conducted a meta-analysis using a random effects model when possible. The review protocol is registered in PROSPERO under CRD42022341325. Results: Psilocybin induced a rapid and sustained reduction in depressive and anxiety symptoms in patients with major depressive disorder and in patients with life-threatening cancer. MDMA induced a decrease in depressive symptoms in patients with life-threatening cancer, autism spectrum disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder. MDMA’s effect size was either negligible or negative in reducing generalized anxiety symptoms, but MDMA reduced social anxiety symptoms. Ayahuasca induced a reduction in depressive symptoms in individuals with treatment-resistant major depressive and personality disorders. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) induced a decrease in anxiety symptoms in individuals with life-threatening cancer. Psilocybin’s adverse effects were noticeable for elevated blood pressure, headaches, and panic attacks. For MDMA, elevated blood pressure, headaches, panic attacks, and feeling cold were noticeable. Conclusions: Psychedelics (psilocybin, ayahuasca, and LSD) and MDMA have the potential to induce a reduction in depressive and anxiety symptoms. Adverse effects are noticed. Rigorous randomized controlled studies with larger sample sizes utilizing instruments with better reliability and validity are warranted.