Psychedelic Therapy: A Primer for Primary Care Clinicians—3,4-Methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA)

Authors: Kenneth Shinozuka, B. Tabaac, Alejandro Arenas, B. Beutler, Kirsten N. Cherian, V. Evans, Chelsey Fasano, Owen S Muir
Journal: American Journal of Therapeutics
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000001722
Citations: 6
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fe51abeb2e3cfd4a4c3c93b3527d54bd54f16c6

ABSTRACT: Background: After becoming notorious for its use as a party drug in the 1980s, 3,4-methylenedioxy-methampetamine (MDMA), also known by its street names “molly” and “ecstasy,” has emerged as a powerful treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Areas of Uncertainty: There are extensive data about the risk profile of MDMA. However, the literature is significantly biased. Animal models demonstrating neurotoxic or adverse effects used doses well beyond the range that would be expected in humans (up to 40 mg/kg in rats compared with roughly 1–2 mg/kg in humans). Furthermore, human samples often comprise recreational users who took other substances in addition to MDMA, in uncontrolled settings. Therapeutic Advances: Phase III clinical trials led by the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) have shown that MDMA-assisted psychotherapy has an effect size of d = 0.7–0.91, up to 2–3 times higher than the effect sizes of existing antidepressant treatments. 67%–71% of patients who undergo MDMA-assisted psychotherapy no longer meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD within 18 weeks. We also describe other promising applications of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for treating alcohol use disorder, social anxiety, and other psychiatric conditions. Limitations: Thus far, almost all clinical trials on MDMA have been sponsored by a single organization, MAPS. More work is needed to determine whether MDMA-assisted therapy is more effective than existing nonpharmacological treatments such as cognitive behavioral therapy. Conclusions: Phase III trials suggest that MDMA is superior to antidepressant medications for treating PTSD. Now that MAPS has officially requested the Food and Drug Administration to approve MDMA as a treatment for PTSD, legal MDMA-assisted therapy may become available as soon as 2024.