Psychedelic Therapy: A Primer for Primary Care Clinicians—Historical Perspective and Overview

Authors: B. Tabaac, K. Shinozuka, Alejandro Arenas, B. Beutler, Kirsten N. Cherian, V. Evans, Chelsey Fasano, Owen S Muir
Journal: American Journal of Therapeutics
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000001727
Citations: 9
URL: https://doi.org/10.1097/mjt.0000000000001727

ABSTRACT: Background: Psychedelic drugs have recently emerged as plausibly effective pharmacological agents for the management of depression, anxiety, and other neuropsychiatric conditions, including those that are treatment-resistent. The latter half of the 20th century marked a revolution in the treatment of mental illnesses, exemplified by the introduction of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and other pharmacological agents. Nevertheless, mental illness remains a major public health crisis, affecting nearly one billion individuals worldwide. Areas of Uncertainty: Because of the decades-long status of several psychedelics as Schedule I drugs, there have not been very many large, double-blind, randomized controlled trials of psychedelics. Owing to small sample sizes, there may be rare yet serious adverse events that have not been reported in the clinical trials thus far. Therapeutic Advances: Esketamine, a dissociative hallucinogen drug, was approved for the management of major depressive disorder by the Food and Drug Administration in 2019. As of January 2024, two Phase III trials of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), a synthetic drug that inhibits the serotonin transporter, have been completed; the results indicate that MDMA is superior to existing pharmacological treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder. A phase III trial of psilocybin, a naturally occurring serotonin receptor partial agonist, is currently underway. The following series details the current state of research in psychedelic therapeutics, including lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), N-N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and ayahuasca, psilocybin, ibogaine, MDMA, and ketamine. Limitations: While initial clinical trials of psychedelics for depression were very promising, trials of psilocybin with larger sample sizes (100+ participants) suggest that its remission rate is 25%–29%. This is about the same as the remission rate of antidepressants, which is roughly 30% according to the landmark STAR*D trial. Conclusions: Psychedelic drugs and structural derivatives offer a great deal of promise for the management of a wide range of psychiatric morbidities. It is imperative that clinicians become familiar with these novel agents and learn how to integrate psychedelic therapy with the rest of their care through open communication and referral.