Expert opinions on implementation of MDMA-assisted therapy in Europe: critical appraisal towards training, clinical practice, and regulation

Authors: Jerome Herpers, Natalie Maximets, N. V. van Dongen, J. Zijlmans, E. Vermetten
Journal: European Journal of Psychotraumatology
Date: 2024
DOI: 10.1080/20008066.2024.2378651
Citations: 6
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9d3538abf1fad5fb4148fab51eaf92efb600fa22

ABSTRACT: ABSTRACT Introduction: The positive results of MDMA from Phase 2 and 3 clinical trials in MDMA-assisted therapy (MDMA-AT) for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) call for a critical evaluation of its regulatory status within the European mental healthcare system. This is driven by the recent submission of MDMA-AT for FDA approval in the United States. Unless coordinated efforts in the European regulatory landscape start, there may be potential divergences in national regulatory strategies. Gaining insights from researchers and clinicians involved in the application of MDMA-AT may be useful in guiding the discussion of factors involved in its implementation. Method: A comprehensive invitation-only survey was sent to researchers and clinicians involved in MDMA-AT clinical trials and contributors to the scientific literature on MDMA-AT from around the globe. This study aimed to collect opinions on clinical practices, training, and regulation worldwide, examining the global best practices and pitfalls to outline strategies for possible European implementation of MDMA-AT. Results: The survey, which included responses from 68 experts, yielded a range of opinions where a large majority endorsed the need for training and standardization, emphasizing equity and access, stressing impediments in the national approval processes, and reflecting critically on anticipated spill-over effects of MDMA-AT in clinical settings. Conclusion: The experts highlight the need for science-informed policy development, active regulatory involvement, and international cooperation to incorporate MDMA-AT into the European mental healthcare system in general and the treatment of PTSD in particular. The study emphasizes the importance of ongoing research, open professional discourse, and collaborative engagement to facilitate MDMA-AT's ethical and effective implementation.

FULL TEXT:
The prevalence and debilitating nature of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) pose significant challenges for clinical research, as current treatments often fail to provide adequate relief for many patients (Burback et al., 2023). First, patients with PTSD who do not respond to established treatments face a significant risk of enduring chronic disability and distress. However, despite the prevalence of treatment-resistant PTSD (TR-PTSD) as a clinical issue, there is currently no standardized method for assessing the outcomes of prior treatments (Dunlop et al., 2014). Second, a consensus on the definition TR-PTSD has not yet been reached (Sippel et al., 2018). Additionally, international guidelines for PTSD lack specific recommendations based on the chronicity or stage of the disorder. Strong evidence suggests a limited number of PTSD symptom trajectories, indicating that distinct phenotypes of the disorder can be identified, which are crucial for developing a staging typology for PTSD. Therefore, the evidence connecting specific treatments to particular stages is limited for most interventions, highlighting the necessity for further research in this area (Nijdam et al., 2023).

Despite current treatment options, such as psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, a substantial percentage (33–60%) of patients do not attain remission, regardless of the treatment regimen employed. Findings suggest that there is refusal or intolerance of trauma exposure therapies and a lack of positive response to eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), as well as to trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT). Some PTSD patients also fail to benefit from selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and venlafaxine, as well as from a serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) (Illingworth et al., 2021). This has directed attention towards the use of MDMA in a new form of assisted therapy, branded as MDMA-assisted therapy (MDMA-AT). Promising results from recent studies indicate that MDMA-AT has a large impact on the treatment of PTSD: about two-thirds of treatment-resistant PTSD patients no longer meet the criteria of PTSD after three months of treatment, with these benefits persisting over time (Jerome et al., 2020; Mitchell et al., 2021, 2023).

Despite these favourable outcomes, the regulation of MDMA and implementation of MDMA-AT in mental health care is facing substantial challenges. Whereas the safety, long-term efficacy, and mechanisms of action of MDMA-AT are being more thoroughly comprehended, there are remaining questions driving new research studies (Godes et al., 2023; Kyzar et al., 2017). Some methodological concerns have been raised regarding the research on MDMA-AT and other forms of psychedelic psychotherapy, for example, the lack of long-term follow-up data and apprehension that psychedelic RCTs may be affected by confounding factors such as de-blinding and participant expectancy where the efficacy of treatments in psychedelic RCTs may be overestimated due to participants becoming aware of their treatment allocation and having high expectations of positive outcomes (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2021). Additionally, the active involvement of advocacy groups in research and dependence on non-government funding leads to oversimplified public messaging (Bedi et al., 2023). Moreover, trial design and conduct issues were mentioned in the evidence report published by The Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (Mustafa et al., 2024). Nevertheless, scientists responding to the above-mentioned report claim that robust primary results of two Phase 3 trials indicate a positive benefit-risk ratio for MDMA-AT in patients with PTSD, including severe cases where other treatments did not work, and advocate for further research (Agboola & Square, 2024). Additionally, identifying the patients who would benefit most from MDMA-AT, considering their unique symptom combinations and personality profiles, remains a critical area for further investigation (Krediet et al., 2020). This underscores the need for comprehensive research that addresses these crucial aspects and harnesses the therapy's full potential for addressing mental health needs. These developments require a thorough examination of MDMA's regulatory status, both to facilitate patient access to MDMA-AT and to enable researchers to conduct new studies and design ways of implementing it in various national mental health care settings.

The regulation of MDMA-AT is at a critical junction. Last year, Australia became the first country to officially regulate the medical use of psychedelics, and MDMA-assisted therapy for PTSD is expected to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) by the end of 2024. Concurrently, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) is assessing whether new clinical trials are necessary for European approval. These developments signal a potential shift in PTSD treatment: new treatment options for treatment-resistant PTSD patients. However, this shift is impossible without proper regulation to prevent unwanted consequences. Optimal regulatory approaches are crucial to fully understand and manage the potential harms of MDMA-AT during implementation. In the European Union, the impending registration of MDMA-AT necessitates careful consideration and preparation by governmental bodies for its integration into mental health services (van Amsterdam et al., 2021). The acknowledgment of MDMA as a therapeutic agent calls for informed and prudent policy-making. This situation is further complicated by the varied legal and regulatory status of MDMA-AT globally. Some countries allow its therapeutic use under specific exemptions or within certain research programmes, while others continue to enforce its prohibition. This diverse legal landscape underscores the need for a comprehensive understanding of MDMA-AT's regulatory context (van Amsterdam et al., 2021).

In anticipation of these developments, the Dutch government has established an interdisciplinary State Committee that recently reported on the health effects of MDMA, including the recommendation of facilitating the integration of MDMA-AT within existing legal and regulatory frameworks (Rijksoverheid, 2024). This proactive step reflects a growing recognition of the need to incorporate emerging therapies in mental health care. In support of this committee's efforts, our study was designed to explore expert opinions on the future regulation of MDMA-AT. We conducted an online survey encompassing well-known trauma treatment specialists who are familiar with MDMA-AT, aiming to capture diverse professional insights and perspectives. The primary objective of this study was to gain insights from experts that will inform well-structured recommendations for integrating MDMA-AT into the European mental health care system. By doing so, we aim to contribute to the development of policies that are both scientifically sound and ethically responsible, ensuring that MDMA-AT's integration into mental health services is conducted in a way that maximizes its therapeutic potential and safeguards patient well-being.

The study was designed to gather current expert opinions on clinical practices, training, and regulation of MDMA-assisted therapy worldwide to identify global best practices and challenges, ultimately informing well-structured recommendations for integrating MDMA-AT into the European mental health care system. We collected information via an online survey capturing opinions from a selected group of clinical researchers and scientists to achieve this.

We identified potential respondents by contacting researchers and therapists that we know that work with MDMA or other psychedelics therapeutically. The survey was forwarded to an association of Dutch psychiatrist that endorse clinical use of psychedelics. Furthermore, through thewe searched on clinicaltrials.gov website and contacted all researchers listed with ongoing or planned MDMA-AT studies. Only one contact is mentioned per study on clinicaltrials.gov, so we asked to forward the survey to the colleagues involved. In addition, we reviewed academic publications for authors who have published either in clinical trials or in systematic reviews about the medical use of MDMA, though currently had no trial listed on clinicaltrials.gov. Inclusion criteria included the role in MDMA-AT as a psychiatrist, therapist, researcher, educator, or advocate, and being familiar with MDMA-AT. Participants outside of this role and being unfamiliar with MDMA-AT were excluded.

The survey centred around six themes: 1. Regulation aimed to gather diverse perspectives on the regulatory environment and identify common hurdles in the advancement of MDMA-AT in the mental health sector; 2. Training and standardization aimed to assess views on standardizing the training process to ensure safe and effective administration of MDMA-AT; 3. Program preferences aimed to assess preferences regarding the modes of access to MDMA-AT; 4. Perceived impact and implications aimed to capture a comprehensive view of the projected impact and reception of MDMA-AT in the mental health sector; 5. Equity and access, research and regulation aimed to assess equity and inclusivity in MDMA-AT, identifying current research gaps and understanding recent or forthcoming regulatory changes related to MDMA-AT in various countries; 6. Spill-over effects aimed to evaluate the perceived risks of such effects, from a regulated medical context to unregulated contexts, such as retreat centres and recreational MDMA use.

We performed descriptive analyses. We plotted stacked bar graphs for informative questions with percentages presented for each answer. For open questions, we used ChatGPT 4 data analyst (OpenAI, 2024) to summarize the answers.

108 potential participants were directly contacted. Seventy-five respondents filled out the survey over three weeks between 9 October and 23 October 2023. Five respondents were excluded since they were working as regulators for governmental bodies. Respondents were at least 25 years old, and age groups were equally represented (Figure 1A). Respondents were mainly affiliated with research institutions, academia, non-profit organizations, and pharmaceutical companies (Figure 1B). People who selected ‘other’ often specified their professional role as mental health care workers. The survey included respondents from a range of different countries in Europe (mainly the Netherlands and the UK) and some from North America and Israel (Figure 1C). MDMA has not been approved for clinical use in the respondents’ countries. However, it is allowed in research programmes in many countries, or it is under review for approval (Figure 1D). All participants but two reported to be familiar with MDMA-AT. One of the respondents who reported not being familiar with MDMA-AT mentioned being a psychiatrist involved in clinical trials for psilocybin-assisted therapy. Most of the respondents reported being involved with MDMA-AT as a therapist, researcher, or psychiatrist.

Respondent characteristics: age (A), professional affiliation (B), and country (C) of the respondents, as well as opinion of the legal status of MDMA-AT in their country of residence (D).

Almost half of the respondents believe that the current regulatory status is not in unity with the available scientific evidence, and only 15% thought it to be moderately to highly aligned (Figure 2A). According to the respondents, a challenge in the regulatory approval of MDMA-AT is the political or public perception, as mentioned by 54% of the respondents. Other perceived challenges are stigma associated with psychedelics (47%), lacking an industry partner for Europe (37%), concerns about safety effects (35%), interpretation of clinical trial data (21%), and ethical considerations (12%). Challenges are perceived to be more significant for the approval of MDMA-AT in Europe compared to the USA. Information perceived as currently lacking is long-term follow-up data, with 71% of the participants marking this as essential or very important, closely followed by other options for lacking information, such as comparative studies with other treatments and more robust clinical trial results (Figure 2B).

Respondent opinions: regulatory status (A), missing information for regulation (B), potential impact of MDMA-AT (C), and spill-over effects (D).

The vast majority (88%) of respondents strongly believe that specialized training should be mandatory for therapists who provide MDMA-assisted therapy, just as psychological integration techniques are deemed most important for inclusion in the training for MDMA-AT (93%). Other elements are medical considerations and safety protocols (88%), ethical guidelines (78%), session structuring, and patient communication (71%). Open suggestions (16%) emphasized the importance of therapist self-experience for a deeper understanding of the effects of MDMA-AT, adverse event reporting, and the inclusion of patients’ social networks in the treatment process.

Comments on the training for MDMA-assisted therapy suggest that the training should be comprehensive and include elements such as initial intensive training (ranging from a few weeks to a semester), therapist self-experience with MDMA, and ongoing supervision. The importance of existing qualifications and experience in psychotherapy, along with the flexibility to adapt the duration based on individual competency and specific therapeutic contexts, is also highlighted. The preference for ongoing supervision, as indicated by the highest percentage (38%) in the multiple-choice responses, underscores the need for continuous learning and adaptation in this evolving field. A total of 71% of the respondents consider standardized protocols in MDMA-AT to be necessary. Adherence to standardized protocols can be established with proper training and licensing. Regarding training delivery, 62% see a role for MAPS, 57% want a national institution involved, and 39% see a role for other organizations. Suggestions include partnerships between MAPS and local or international entities, academic institutions, and independent bodies, emphasizing quality, expertise, and best practice adherence.

As long as MDMA-AT is not officially registered in a certain constituency, the most popular approach is ‘Expanded Access’ with 43% of respondents selecting this option. This approach allows the use of MDMA-AT for patients not enrolled in clinical trials, typically due to urgent medical needs. ‘Special Access,’ which permits healthcare practitioners to prescribe MDMA only in specific circumstances, follows with 29% support. Additionally, 11% believe in the potential of ‘Off-label Use,’ and 7% favour ‘Compassionate Use.’ Finally, 7% of respondents suggest other approaches, emphasizing the need for broader but regulated access and stressing that all options currently offer limited patient access. There is a general sentiment that these programmes are interim solutions until MDMA-AT receives full approval as a therapeutic method.

The vast majority of the respondents (88%) predict a positive effect on the mental health landscape (Figure 2C), and 87% believe that its most significant benefit lies in treating treatment-resistant PTSD. Additionally, 78% see it as offering a new paradigm in mental health treatment. The therapy is also seen by 56% as a means to reduce long-term dependency on medications. Other notable benefits that respondents suggest are its potential in treating a variety of mental health conditions, its application in couple therapy, and its role in deepening the understanding of psychiatric conditions.

As for potential risks, the most selected concern (79%) is the risk of insufficient therapist training. According to the participants’ opinion, many mainstream therapists lack the appropriate personality traits, personal experience, and comprehension of altered states of consciousness necessary to effectively manage these conditions in a manner that maximizes benefits and minimizes harm. They may also have an insufficient understanding of the therapeutic process and an undifferentiated understanding of the phenomenon of repressed memories. Additionally, the respondents raised concerns that individuals without any therapeutic training may employ such treatments as well. All of this may result in an inappropriate therapist response to the heightened vulnerability in these states, and insufficient preparation and integration. Respondents also emphasized the necessity of addressing ethical concerns, including informed consent, the use of therapeutic touch, and maintaining therapists’ integrity.

Additionally, 38% of participants identify difficulties in standardizing treatment protocols. The potential for misuse or abuse is also a notable concern for 29% of respondents. The majority of the respondents reported varied public views of MDMA-AT in their country (47%), although a positive, supportive public is assumed and reported by 38%. Regulatory and medical bodies are perceived to have cautious openness to MDMA-AT (69%).

Of all respondents, 15% report active efforts to facilitate providing access to underserved communities. Meanwhile, 26% note that access is limited to specific patient profiles. 32% acknowledge no particular focus on equity and inclusivity in their jurisdictions. Additionally, 26% are unsure about the state of access.

Responses to the open question about current research gaps in the field of MDMA-AT indicate a broad range of areas needing further exploration. There is a call for expanding research to include other mental health conditions beyond PTSD, such as chronic pain, eating disorders, personality disorders, and depression, but also conditions like addiction and autism. The efficacy of MDMA-AT in different settings, like group therapy and couple therapy, is also a point of interest. There is a need for more diverse participant groups in studies to understand the therapy's efficacy across different demographics, particularly in treating race-based trauma and refugees with PTSD. Respondents also emphasize the importance of investigating the integration process after therapy and the role of self-experience for therapists. Comparing MDMA-AT with standard treatments, understanding therapist variables, and integrating this therapy into existing mental health services are other key areas highlighted. 88% of the respondents report no recent changes in their country or are unsure about the state of affairs. Recent legal changes are reported in the respondents in the USA and Canada (9%).

The survey results indicate mixed views on the impact of regulating MDMA-AT on non-official MDMA treatments and recreational MDMA use. 44% of respondents believe it is possible that legal MDMA therapy could increase non-official MDMA treatments like retreats or underground therapy, while 26% find it likely or very likely, and 22% find it unlikely or very unlikely (Figure 2D). Concerning the influence on recreational MDMA use, 41% believe it is unlikely to boost recreational use, and 26% think this is very unlikely. A small minority considers it likely (7%), and 22% consider it possible. None of the respondents believe it is very expected (Figure 2D).

There is a mixed opinion among the respondents, with approximately 49% expressing the belief that extra measures are required for the safe and ethical provision of MDMA-AT, while the remaining 51% do not deem additional regulations necessary. Those advocating for extra measures emphasize the importance of legal approval for therapists’ self-experience of MDMA-AT, specialized training, and the need for certification and accreditation by professional bodies. They highlight the necessity for careful monitoring of the education, supervision, and quality of treatment, citing concerns about the increased vulnerability and suggestibility in non-ordinary states induced by MDMA. Specific suggestions include stringent oversight of clinicians, medical monitoring, clear treatment guidelines, and the establishment of specialized mental health care centres with adequately trained professionals. Respondents also stressed the importance of addressing ethical concerns, such as informed consent, therapeutic touch, and ensuring therapists’ integrity. The monitoring of therapists to prevent abuse, such as through video recording, and guidelines for the community of therapists working underground with MDMA are also mentioned.

In this study, we collected informed opinions on the regulatory and clinical challenges surrounding the integration of MDMA-AT for the treatment of PTSD in the European mental health care system. A comprehensive survey of 68 clinical researchers and MDMA-AT specialists yielded valuable opinions, particularly highlighting the discrepancy between existing regulatory frameworks and the clinical evidence supporting MDMA-AT. Of significance was the generally positive perception of MDMA-AT among professionals, with a consensus that, despite caution for safety and long-term efficacy concerns, its therapeutic benefits for treatment-resistant PTSD are expected to have a very positive impact. This expectation might be based on the high overall efficacy rates found in clinical trials (Jerome et al., 2020; Mitchell et al., 2021; 2023) in combination with the urgent need for novel therapeutic approaches for PTSD (Burback et al., 2023; Zaretsky et al., 2024). There was consensus that the implementation of current clinical practices around the use of MDMA is hindered because of regulatory frameworks in many European countries.

The survey underscores the complexity of the integration of MDMA-AT into established healthcare frameworks and, in the meantime, indicates a pressing need for real-world, long-term safety and efficacy studies to strengthen the case for regulatory approval in Europe. The main recommendation that follows from the results of this survey is the establishment of a collaborative effort involving governmental bodies and professional psychiatric, psychological, and nursing associations to ensure the responsible implementation of MDMA-AT, with a call for integrating psychological techniques, medical knowledge, safety protocols, and ethical guidelines. Further recommendations include that appropriate regulatory policies should be installed to curtail the uncontrolled proliferation of unregulated medical and non-medical use of MDMA. Our study also reveals a notable lack of emphasis on equity and inclusivity in MDMA-AT access. Finally, in the case MDMA-AT becomes an evidence-based clinical tool, concerns about qualified therapist capacity should be anticipated.

The approval of MDMA-assisted therapy (MDMA-AT) represents a novel development in the regulatory landscape, necessitating special attention due to its unique therapeutic paradigm and associated risks. Unlike traditional pharmaceuticals, MDMA-AT combines the pharmacological effects of MDMA with structured psychotherapeutic sessions, presenting distinct challenges and opportunities in clinical practice and regulatory frameworks. This integrative approach is also seen in the ongoing regulatory processes for psilocybin-assisted therapy (psilocybin-AT) and ketamine-assisted therapy (ketamine-AT). Both psilocybin-AT and ketamine-AT leverage the synergistic effects of the drug and therapeutic intervention but are at different stages of regulatory approval. Psilocybin-AT is currently undergoing Phase 3 clinical trials with promising results for treatment-resistant depression (Carhart-Harris et al., 2021; Griffiths et al., 2016), whereas ketamine-AT, through the approval of esketamine, has already established a precedent with its FDA approval in 2019 for treatment-resistant depression (FDA, 2019).

However, the risks associated with MDMA-AT, such as potential neurotoxicity, cardiovascular effects, and the risk of misuse, necessitate rigorous safety protocols (Doblin et al., 2014). Psilocybin, while generally considered safe, can induce transient psychological distress and perceptual changes (Johnson et al., 2008). Ketamine, although rapidly effective, carries risks of dissociation, potential for abuse, and long-term cognitive effects (Wan et al., 2015). This emerging trend underscores the importance of comprehensive evaluation frameworks that address the complexities and risks of drug-assisted psychotherapies, ensuring safety, efficacy, and ethical considerations are thoroughly integrated into the approval process.

Relevant literature highlights ethical issues that need to be considered in greater detail. For example, it is important to emphasize that the informed consent form ensures clinicians provide complete information and makes it clear that participants remain free to withdraw at any time (Williams et al., 2020). Additionally, while entering a temporary state of enhanced psychological vulnerability, suggestibility, and expanded interpersonal trust can significantly enhance therapeutic efficacy, it may also heighten the risk of potential abuse by unethical PAT therapists (Hoener et al., 2024). Thus, the use of touch in conjunction with MDMA raises concerns regarding power imbalances and the maintenance of ethical boundaries (Luoma et al., 2024). Additionally, confidentiality must be preserved except in instances where legal or ethical obligations necessitate the disclosure of information (Kangaslampi & Zijlmans, 2023). All of the above-mentioned ethical concerns must be taken into consideration to ensure a safe therapeutic process involving MDMA-AT.

Currently, with no direct efforts for MDMA-AT approval in Europe, MDMA-AT might be placed in a grey zone. Expanded access programmes were favoured by the survey respondents, meaning the therapy is available in case of urgent medical needs outside of clinical trials. An alternative programme that was not included in the survey is prescription on a so-called ‘named-patient basis’, in which doctors obtain unapproved medicine directly from a manufacturer for a single patient. his method has been used for many years in Switzerland for MDMA-AT. The path to regulatory approval involves acquiring a license from the EMA, potentially via extensive (inter)national studies or by recognition and endorsement of the current phase III clinical trials as sufficient evidence. It also presents an opportunity to collaborate with the EMA in negotiating new design of naturalistic ‘real world’ studies to collect additional data, while contributing to compliance with the standards for safety, efficacy, and quality.

The survey had a question about the potential risks or challenges in the case of approval of MDMA-assisted therapy. Our study was limited by the availability of only one answer option to this question regarding potential ethical issues, ‘ethical concerns about informed consent.’ Although we created a separate section below to encourage the participants to provide the details of their answers and received certain valuable insights, we consider this insufficient given the broader range of ethical concerns present in the field of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.

It should be noted that responses could have been biased. Participating experts funded by enterprises that stand something to gain from FDA approval of MDMA-AT (e.g. MAPS, Lykos Therapeutics, Remedy, etc.) might be inclined to give a more favourable response than they otherwise would have given. However, we expect such funder bias to be minimal. Five of the 107 experts we contacted are directly involved with MAPS and 42 were contacted through the trial they have registered on clinicaltrial.gov. Of these registered trials, only 27 are industry-sponsored. Thus, although some upward bias is likely, we expect this to be minimal. Furthermore, it should be noted that the survey concerned the opinions of experts, which is always coloured by personal interests, ideals, and perspectives. We present it as such.

According to the respondents, regulated medical use of MDMA is expected to have a positive impact on the mental healthcare system. Concurrently, there was consensus that the current regulatory framework for MDMA-AT does not match the available scientific evidence. It is therefore recommended to establish informed policy development, active cross-national regulatory involvement, as well as international cooperation to incorporate MDMA-AT into the European mental healthcare system.

We would like to thank the survey respondents for their participation, prof. Dr. Wim van den Brink for reviewing the draft version, and Dr. Joost Breeeksema and Raoul Koning for review of survey design.

Eric Vermetten served as PI of a MAPS MDMA-AT phase II open-label trial.

Raw and processed data is available at doi:

Raw and processed data is available at doi: