From the party to the therapy – MDMA as an alternative for the existing methods of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder treatment

Authors: Wiktoria Bojarska, Karolina Bury, Radosław Januszczak, Bartosz Burda
Journal: Current Problems of Psychiatry
Date: 2023
DOI: 10.12923/2353-8627/2023-0020
Citations: 0
URL: http://www.cppsych.umlub.pl/gfx/cppsych/userfiles/_shared/cppsych/volume_24/cpp-2023-0020.pdf

ABSTRACT: Introduction: Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a mental illness caused by exposure to a traumatic event. The current treatment includes trauma-focused psychotherapy along with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI). It is estimated that for about 40-60% of patients it does not bring the desired improvement, which prompted scientists to look for new methods of pharmacotherapy. The most promising compound is MDMA.
Material and methods: The purpose of this paper is to review publications from years 2020-2022 available on the PubMed platform about using MDMA in PTSD treatment, using words: MDMA, PTSD, MDMA and PTSD.
Discussion: MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine) is a psychoactive substance that increases brain levels of serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine. Studies show that this treatment reduces symptoms of severe PTSD, comparing to placebo and current treatment. Patients reported improvement in terms of well-being, number of nightmares, sleep disorders, self-perception or interpersonal relationships. The positive effects of MDMA therapy were long-lasting. They persisted for 12 months after the end of treatment. According to research, MDMA reduces the symptoms of concomitant disorders, e.g. of eating disorders or by reducing alcohol consumption, without increasing the risk of abuse of other substances or MDMA itself. In addition, MDMA is believed to improve psychotherapy by allowing patients to revisit the traumatic event without negative symptoms. Side effects of therapy are less serious and occur less often than in the case of previously used SSRIs.
Conclusions: Abovementioned observations show that MDMA-assisted PTSD psychotherapy is a promising alternative to the existing methods and brings hope for patients with the most severe or treatment-resistant course.

Keywords: MDMA, N-Methyl-3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine, MDMA-assisted psychotherapy, PTSD